# Genomic-Analysis-of-SARS-CoV-2-Variants-of-Concern-Circulating-in-Hawai-i-to-Facilitate-Public-Healt
Genomic Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern Circulating in Hawai’i to Facilitate Public-Health Policies

Abstract
Using genomics, bioinformatics and statistics, herein we demonstrate the effect of quarantine on the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOC) in Hawai’i. To define the origins of VOC, we analyzed 260 VOC sequences from Hawai’i, and 301,646 VOC sequences worldwide, deposited in the GenBank and GISAID, and constructed phylogenetic trees. The trees define the most recent common ancestor as the origin. Further, the multiple sequence alignment used to generate the phylogenetic trees identified the consensus single nucleotide polymorphisms in the VOC genomes. These consensus sequences allow for VOC comparison and identification of mutations of interest in relation to viral immune evasion and host immune activation. The B.1.1.7, B.1.351, B.1.427, and B.1.429 VOC have been introduced in Hawai'i multiple times since December 2020. From the first worldwide report of VOC by GenBank and GISAID, to the arrival of VOC in Hawai’i, averages 300 days with quarantine, and 110 days without quarantine. As such, the effect of quarantine is shown to significantly affect the time to arrival of VOC. Further, at least 76% of all definable SARS-CoV-2 VOC have entered Hawai’i from California, with the B.1.351 variant in Hawai’i originating exclusively from the United Kingdom. Based on the phylogenetic trees, we conclude that VOC circulating in Hawai’i have entered Hawai’i at different timepoints from several definable geographic regions, with a majority attributable to originating from California. These data provide a foundation for policy-makers and public-health officials to apply precision public health genomics to real-world policies such as mandatory screening and quarantine. 
